<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of “The Novel”</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<article id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of “The Novel”</h2>
			<p>I do not intend in these pages to put in a plea for this little novel. On the contrary, the ideas I shall try to set forth will rather involve a criticism of the class of psychological analysis which I have undertaken in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pierre and Jean</i>. I propose to treat of novels in general.</p>
			<p>I am not the only writer who finds himself taken to task in the same terms each time he brings out a new book. Among many laudatory phrases, I invariably meet with this observation, penned by the same critics: “The greatest fault of this book is that it is not, strictly speaking, a novel.”</p>
			<p>The same form might be adopted in reply:</p>
			<p>“The greatest fault of the writer who does me the honour to review me is that he is not a critic.”</p>
			<p>For what are, in fact, the essential characteristics of a critic?</p>
			<p>It is necessary that, without preconceived notions, prejudices of “School,” or partisanship for any class of artists, he should appreciate, distinguish, and explain the most antagonistic tendencies and the most dissimilar temperaments, recognising and accepting the most varied efforts of art.</p>
			<p>Now the Critic who, after reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manon Lescaut</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Paul and Virginia</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Liaisons dangereuses</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Werther</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Elective Affinities</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Wahlverwandschaften</i>), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Clarissa Harlowe</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Émile</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Candide</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Cinq-Mars</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">René</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Trois Mousquetaires</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mauprat</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Père Goriot</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Cousine Bette</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Colomba</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Rouge et le Noir</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mademoiselle de Maupin</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notre-Dame de Paris</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Salammbo</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Madame Bovary</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adolphe</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Camors</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">l’Assommoir</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sapho</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, still can be so bold as to write “This or that is, or is not, a novel,” seems to me to be gifted with a perspicacity strangely akin to incompetence. Such a critic commonly understands by a novel a more or less improbable narrative of adventure, elaborated after the fashion of a piece for the stage, in three acts, of which the first contains the exposition, the second the action, and the third the catastrophe or dénouement.</p>
			<p>And this method of construction is perfectly admissible, but on condition that all others are accepted on equal terms.</p>
			<p>Are there any rules for the making of a novel, which, if we neglect, the tale must be called by another name? If <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> is a novel, then is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Rouge et le Noir</i> a novel? If <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Monte Christo</i> is a novel, is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">l’Assommoir</i>? Can any conclusive comparison be drawn between Goethe’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Elective Affinities</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Three Mousqueteers</i>, by Dumas, Flaubert’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Madame Bovary</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Camors</i>, by Octave Feuillet, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Germinal</i>, by Zola? Which of them all is The Novel? What are these famous rules? Where did they originate? Who laid them down? And in virtue of what principle, of whose authority, and of what reasoning?</p>
			<p>And yet, as it would appear, these critics know in some positive and indisputable way what constitutes a novel, and what distinguishes it from other tales which are not novels. What this amounts to is that without being producers themselves they are enrolled under a School, and that, like the writers of novels, they reject all work which is conceived and executed outside the pale of their aesthetics. An intelligent critic ought, on the contrary, to seek out everything which least resembles the novels already written, and urge young authors as much as possible to try fresh paths.</p>
			<p>All writers, Victor Hugo as much as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Zola, have insistently claimed the absolute and incontrovertible right to compose⁠—that is to say, to imagine or observe⁠—in accordance with their individual conception of originality, and that is a special manner of thinking, seeing, understanding, and judging. Now the critic who assumes that “the novel” can be defined in conformity with the ideas he has based on the novels he prefers, and that certain immutable rules of construction can be laid down, will always find himself at war with the artistic temperament of a writer who introduces a new manner of work. A critic really worthy of the name ought to be an analyst, devoid of preferences or passions; like an expert in pictures, he should simply estimate the artistic value of the object of art submitted to him. His intelligence, open to everything, must so far supersede his individuality as to leave him free to discover and praise books which as a man he may not like, but which as a judge he must duly appreciate.</p>
			<p>But critics, for the most part, are only readers; whence it comes that they almost always find fault with us on wrong grounds, or compliment us without reserve or measure.</p>
			<p>The reader, who looks for no more in a book than that it should satisfy the natural tendencies of his own mind, wants the writer to respond to his predominant taste, and he invariably praises a work or a passage which appeals to his imagination, whether idealistic, gay, licentious, melancholy, dreamy or positive, as “striking” or “well written.”</p>
			<p>The public as a whole is composed of various groups, whose cry to us writers is:</p>
			<p>“Comfort me.”</p>
			<p>“Amuse me.”</p>
			<p>“Touch me.”</p>
			<p>“Make me dream.”</p>
			<p>“Make me laugh.”</p>
			<p>“Make me shudder.”</p>
			<p>“Make me weep.”</p>
			<p>“Make me think.”</p>
			<p>And only a few chosen spirits say to the artist: “Give me something fine in any form which may suit you best, according to your own temperament.”</p>
			<p>The artist makes the attempt; succeeds or fails.</p>
			<p>The critic ought to judge the result only in relation to the nature of the attempt; he has no right to concern himself about tendencies. This has been said a thousand times already; it will always need repeating.</p>
			<p>Thus, after a succession of literary schools which have given us deformed, superhuman, poetical, pathetic, charming or magnificent pictures of life, a realistic or naturalistic school has arisen, which asserts that it shows us the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.</p>
			<p>All these theories of art must be recognised as of equal interest, and we must judge the works which are their outcome solely from the point of view of artistic value, with an <i xml:lang="la">a priori</i> acceptance of the general notions which gave birth to each. To dispute the author’s right to produce a poetical work or a realistic work, is to endeavour to coerce his temperament, to take exception to his originality, to forbid his using the eyes and wits bestowed on him by Nature. To blame him for seeing things as beautiful or ugly, as mean or epic, as gracious or sinister, is to reproach him for not being made on this or that pattern, and for having eyes which do not see exactly as ours see.</p>
			<p>Let him be free by all means to conceive of things as he pleases, provided he is an artist. Let us rise to poetic heights to judge an idealist, and then prove to him that his dream is commonplace, ordinary, not mad or magnificent enough. But if we judge a materialistic writer, let us show him wherein the truth of life differs from the truth in his book.</p>
			<p>It is self-evident that schools so widely different must have adopted diametrically opposite processes in composition.</p>
			<p>The novelist who transforms truth⁠—immutable, uncompromising, and displeasing as it is⁠—to extract from it an exceptional and delightful plot, must necessarily manipulate events without an exaggerated respect for probability, moulding them to his will, dressing and arranging them so as to attract, excite, or affect the reader. The scheme of his romance is no more than a series of ingenious combinations, skilfully leading to the issue. The incidents are planned and graduated up to the culminating point and effect of the conclusion, which is the crowning and fatal result, satisfying the curiosity aroused from the first, closing the interest, and ending the story so completely that we have no further wish to know what happened on the morrow to the most engaging actors in it.</p>
			<p>The novelist who, on the other hand, proposes to give us an accurate picture of life, must carefully eschew any concatenation of events which might seem exceptional. His aim is not to tell a story to amuse us, or to appeal to our feelings, but to compel us to reflect, and to understand the occult and deeper meaning of events. By dint of seeing and meditating he has come to regard the world, facts, men, and things in a way peculiar to himself, which is the outcome of the sum total of his studious observation. It is this personal view of the world which he strives to communicate to us by reproducing it in a book. To make the spectacle of life as moving to us as it has been to him, he must bring it before our eyes with scrupulous exactitude. Hence he must construct his work with such skill, it must be so artful under so simple a guise, that it is impossible to detect and sketch the plan, or discern the writer’s purpose.</p>
			<p>Instead of manipulating an adventure and working it out in such a way as to make it interesting to the last, he will take his actor or actors at a certain period of their lives, and lead them by natural stages to the next. In this way he will show either how men’s minds are modified by the influence of their environment, or how their passions and sentiments are evolved; how they love or hate, how they struggle in every sphere of society, and how their interests clash⁠—social interests, pecuniary interests, family interests, political interests. The skill of his plan will not consist in emotional power or charm, in an attractive opening or a stirring catastrophe, but in the happy grouping of small but constant facts from which the final purpose of the work may be discerned. If within three hundred pages he depicts ten years of a life so as to show what its individual and characteristic significance may have been in the midst of all the other human beings which surrounded it, he ought to know how to eliminate from among the numberless trivial incidents of daily life all which do not serve his end, and how to set in a special light all those which might have remained invisible to less clear-sighted observers, and which give his book calibre and value as a whole.</p>
			<p>It is intelligible that this method of construction, so unlike the old manner which was patent to all, must often mislead the critics, and that they will not all detect the subtle and secret wires⁠—almost invisibly fine⁠—which certain modern artists use instead of the one string formerly known as the “plot.”</p>
			<p>In a word, while the novelist of yesterday preferred to relate the crises of life, the acute phases of the mind and heart, the novelist of to-day writes the history of the heart, soul, and intellect in their normal condition. To achieve the effect he aims at⁠—that is to say, the sense of simple reality, and to point the artistic lesson he endeavours to draw from it⁠—that is to say, a revelation of what his contemporary man is before his very eyes, he must bring forward no facts that are not irrefragible and invariable.</p>
			<p>But even when we place ourselves at the same point of view as these realistic artists, we may discuss and dispute their theory, which seems to be comprehensively stated in these words: “The whole Truth and nothing but the Truth.” Since the end they have in view is to bring out the philosophy of certain constant and current facts, they must often correct events in favour of probability and to the detriment of truth; for</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Le vrai peut quelquefois, n’être pas le vraisemblable.</i>” (Truth may sometimes not seem probable.)</p>
			<p>The realist, if he is an artist, will endeavour not to show us a commonplace photograph of life, but to give us a presentment of it which shall be more complete, more striking, more cogent than reality itself. To tell everything is out of the question; it would require at least a volume for each day to enumerate the endless, insignificant incidents which crowd our existence. A choice must be made⁠—and this is the first blow to the theory of “the whole truth.”</p>
			<p>Life, moreover, is composed of the most dissimilar things, the most unforeseen, the most contradictory, the most incongruous; it is merciless, without sequence or connection, full of inexplicable, illogical, and contradictory catastrophes, such as can only be classed as miscellaneous facts. This is why the artist, having chosen his subject, can only select such characteristic details as are of use to it, from this life overladen with chances and trifles, and reject everything else, everything by the way.</p>
			<p>To give an instance from among a thousand. The number of persons who, every day, meet with an accidental death, all over the world, is very considerable. But how can we bring a tile on to the head of an important character, or fling him under the wheels of a vehicle in the middle of a story, under the pretext that accident must have its due?</p>
			<p>Again, in life there is no difference of foreground and distance, and events are sometimes hurried on, sometimes left to linger indefinitely. Art, on the contrary, consists in the employment of foresight, and elaboration in arranging skilful and ingenious transitions, in setting essential events in a strong light, simply by the craft of composition, and giving all else the degree of relief, in proportion to their importance, requisite to produce a convincing sense of the special truth to be conveyed.</p>
			<p>“Truth” in such work consists in producing a complete illusion by following the common logic of facts and not by transcribing them pell-mell, as they succeed each other.</p>
			<p>Whence I conclude that the higher order of Realists should rather call themselves Illusionists.</p>
			<p>How childish it is, indeed, to believe in this reality, since to each of us the truth is in his own mind, his own organs! Our own eyes and ears, taste and smell, create as many different truths as there are human beings on earth. And our brains, duly and differently informed by those organs, apprehend, analyze, and decide as differently as if each of us were a being of an alien race. Each of us, then, has simply his own illusion of the world⁠—poetical, sentimental, cheerful, melancholy, foul, or gloomy, according to his nature. And the writer has no other mission than faithfully to reproduce this illusion, with all the elaborations of art which he may have learned and have at his command. The illusion of beauty⁠—which is merely a conventional term invented by man! The illusion of ugliness⁠—which is a matter of varying opinion! The illusion of truth⁠—never immutable! The illusion of depravity⁠—which fascinates so many minds! All the great artists are those who can make other men see their own particular illusion.</p>
			<p>Then we must not be wroth with any theory, since each is simply the outcome, in generalizations, of a special temperament analyzing itself.</p>
			<p>Two of these theories have more particularly been the subject of discussion, and set up in opposition to each other instead of being admitted on an equal footing: that of the purely analytical novel, and that of the objective novel.</p>
			<p>The partisans of analysis require the writer to devote himself to indicating the smallest evolutions of a soul, and all the most secret motives of our every action, giving but a quite secondary importance to the act and fact in itself. It is but the goal, a simple milestone, the excuse for the book. According to them, these works, at once exact and visionary, in which imagination merges into observation, are to be written after the fashion in which a philosopher composes a treatise on psychology, seeking out causes in their remotest origin, telling the why and wherefore of every impulse, and detecting every reaction of the soul’s movements under the promptings of interest, passion, or instinct.</p>
			<p>The partisans of objectivity⁠—odious word⁠—aiming, on the contrary, at giving us an exact presentment of all that happens in life, carefully avoid all complicated explanations, all disquisitions on motive, and confine themselves to let persons and events pass before our eyes. In their opinion, psychology should be concealed in the book, as it is in reality, under the facts of existence.</p>
			<p>The novel as conceived of on these lines gains in interest; there is more movement in the narrative, more colour, more of the stir of life.</p>
			<p>Hence, instead of giving long explanations of the state of mind of an actor in the tale, the objective writer tries to discover the action or gesture which that state of mind must inevitably lead to in that personage, under certain given circumstances. And he makes him so demean himself from one end of the volume to the other, that all his actions, all his movements shall be the expression of his inmost nature, of all his thoughts, and all his impulses or hesitancies. Thus they conceal psychology instead of flaunting it; they use it as the skeleton of the work, just as the invisible bony frame-work is the skeleton of the human body. The artist who paints our portrait does not display our bones.</p>
			<p>To me it seems that the novel executed on this principle gains also in sincerity. It is, in the first place, more probable, for the persons we see moving about us do not divulge to us the motives from which they act.</p>
			<p>We must also take into account the fact that, even if by close observation of men and women we can so exactly ascertain their characters as to predict their behaviour under almost any circumstances, if we can say decisively: “Such a man, of such a temperament, in such a case, will do this or that;” yet it does not follow that we could lay a finger, one by one, on all the secret evolutions of his mind⁠—which is not our own; all the mysterious pleadings of his instincts⁠—which are not the same as ours; all the mingled promptings of his nature⁠—in which the organs, nerves, blood, and flesh are different from ours.</p>
			<p>However great the genius of the gentle, delicate man, guileless of passions and devoted to science and work, he never can so completely transfuse himself into the body of a dashing, sensual, and violent man, of exuberant vitality, torn by every desire or even by every vice, as to understand and delineate the inmost impulses and sensations of a being so unlike himself, even though he may very adequately foresee and relate all the actions of his life.</p>
			<p>In short, the man who writes pure psychology can do no more than put himself in the place of all his puppets in the various situations in which he places them. It is impossible that he should change his organs, which are the sole intermediary between external life and ourselves, which constrain us by their perceptions, circumscribe our sensibilities, and create in each of us a soul essentially dissimilar to all those about us. Our purview and knowledge of the world, and our ideas of life, are acquired by the aid of our senses, and we cannot help transferring them, in some degree, to all the personages whose secret and unknown nature we propose to reveal. Thus, it is always ourselves that we disclose in the body of a king or an assassin, a robber or an honest man, a courtesan, a nun, a young girl, or a coarse market-woman; for we are compelled to put the problem in this personal form: “If <em>I</em> were a king, a murderer, a prostitute, a nun, or a market-woman, what should <em>I</em> do, what should <em>I</em> think, how should <em>I</em> act?” We can only vary our characters by altering the age, the sex, the social position, and all the circumstances of life, of that <em>ego</em> which nature has in fact inclosed in an insurmountable barrier of organs of sense. Skill consists in not betraying this <em>ego</em> to the reader, under the various masks which we employ to cover it.</p>
			<p>Still, though on the point of absolute exactitude, pure psychological analysis is impregnable, it can nevertheless produce works of art as fine as any other method of work.</p>
			<p>Here, for instance, we have the <em>Symbolists</em>. And why not? Their artistic dream is a worthy one; and they have this especially interesting feature: that they know and proclaim the extreme difficulty of art.</p>
			<p>And, indeed, a man must be very daring or foolish to write at all nowadays. And so many and such various masters of the craft, of such multifarious genius, what remains to be done that has not been done, or what to say that has not been said? Which of us all can boast of having written a page, a phrase, which is not to be found⁠—or something very like it⁠—in some other book? When we read, we who are so soaked in (French) literature that our whole body seems as it were a mere compound of words, do we ever light on a line, a thought, which is not familiar to us, or of which we have not had at least some vague forecast?</p>
			<p>The man who only tries to amuse his public by familiar methods, writes confidently, in his candid mediocrity, works intended only for the ignorant and idle crowd. But those who are conscious of the weight of centuries of past literature, whom nothing satisfies, whom everything disgusts because they dream of something better, to whom the bloom is off everything, and who always are impressed with the uselessness, the commonness of their own achievements⁠—these come to regard literary art as a thing unattainable and mysterious, scarcely to be detected save in a few pages by the greatest masters.</p>
			<p>A score of phrases suddenly discovered thrill us to the heart like a startling revelation; but the lines which follow are just like all other verse, the further flow of prose is like all other prose.</p>
			<p>Men of genius, no doubt, escape this anguish and torment because they bear within themselves an irresistible creative power. They do not sit in judgment on themselves. The rest of us, who are no more than persevering and conscious workers, can only contend against invincible discouragement by unremitting effort.</p>
			<p>Two men by their simple and lucid teaching gave me the strength to try again and again: Louis Bouilhet and Gustave Flaubert.</p>
			<p>If I here speak of myself in connection with them, it is because their counsels, as summed up in a few lines, may prove useful to some young writers who may be less self-confident than most are when they make their début in print. Bouilhet, whom I first came to know somewhat intimately about two years before I gained the friendship of Flaubert, by dint of telling me that a hundred lines⁠—or less⁠—if they are without a flaw and contain the very essence of the talent and originality of even a second-rate man, are enough to establish an artist’s reputation, made me understand that persistent toil and a thorough knowledge of the craft, might, in some happy hour of lucidity, power, and enthusiasm, by the fortunate occurrence of a subject in perfect concord with the tendency of our mind, lead to the production of a single work, short but as perfect as we can make it. Then I learned to see that the best-known writers have hardly ever left us more than one such volume; and that needful above all else is the good fortune which leads us to hit upon and discern, amid the multifarious matter which offers itself for selection, the subject which will absorb all our faculties, all that is of worth in us, all our artistic power.</p>
			<p>At a later date, Flaubert, whom I had occasionally met, took a fancy to me. I ventured to show him a few attempts. He read them kindly and replied: “I cannot tell whether you will have any talent. What you have brought me proves a certain intelligence; but never forget this, young man: talent⁠—as Chateaubriand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> says⁠—is nothing but long patience. Go and work.”</p>
			<p>I worked; and I often went to see him, feeling that he liked me, for he had taken to calling me, in jest, his disciple. For seven years I wrote verses, I wrote tales, I even wrote a villainous play. Nothing of all this remains. The master read it all; then, the next Sunday while we breakfasted together, he would give me his criticisms, driving into me by degrees two or three principles which sum up the drift of his long and patient exhortations: “If you have any originality,” said he, “you must above all things bring it out; if you have not you must acquire it.”</p>
			<p>Talent is long patience.</p>
			<p>Everything you want to express must be considered so long, and so attentively, as to enable you to find some aspect of it which no one has yet seen and expressed. There is an unexplored side to everything, because we are wont never to use our eyes but with the memory of what others before us have thought of the things we see. The smallest thing has something unknown in it; we must find it. To describe a blazing fire, a tree in a plain, we must stand face to face with that fire or that tree, till to us they are wholly unlike any other fire or tree. Thus we may become original.</p>
			<p>Then, having established the truth that there are not in the whole world two grains of sand, two flies, two hands, or two noses absolutely alike, he would make me describe in a few sentences some person or object, in such a way as to define it exactly, and distinguish it from every other of the same race or species.</p>
			<p>“When you pass a grocer sitting in his doorway,” he would say, “a porter smoking his pipe, or a cab-stand, show me that grocer and that porter, their attitude and their whole physical aspect, including, as indicated by the skill of the portrait, their whole moral nature, in such a way that I could never mistake them for any other grocer or porter; and by a single word give me to understand wherein one cab-horse differs from fifty others before or behind it.”</p>
			<p>I have explained his notions of style at greater length in another place; they bear a marked relation to the theory of observation I have just laid down. Whatever the thing we wish to say, there is but one word to express it, but one verb to give it movement, but one adjective to qualify it. We must seek till we find this noun, this verb and this adjective, and never be content with getting very near it, never allow ourselves to play tricks, even happy ones, or have recourse to sleights of language to avoid a difficulty. The subtlest things may be rendered and suggested by applying the hint conveyed in Boileau’s line:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">D’un mot mis en sa place enseigna le pouvoir.</i>” “He taught the power of a word put in the right place.”</p>
			<p>There is no need for an eccentric vocabulary to formulate every shade of thought⁠—the complicated, multifarious, and outlandish words which are put upon us nowadays in the name of artistic writing; but every modification of the value of a word by the place it fills must be distinguished with extreme clearness. Give us fewer nouns, verbs, and adjectives, with almost inscrutable shades of meaning, and let us have a greater variety of phrases, more variously constructed, ingeniously divided, full of sonority and learned rhythm. Let us strive to be admirable in style, rather than curious in collecting rare words.</p>
			<p>It is in fact more difficult to bend a sentence to one’s will and make it express everything⁠—even what it does not say, to fill it full of implications of covert and inexplicit suggestions, than to invent new expressions, or seek out in old and forgotten books all those which have fallen into disuse and lost their meaning, so that to us they are as a dead language.</p>
			<p>The French tongue, to be sure, is a pure stream, which affected writers never have and never can trouble. Each age has flung into the limpid waters its pretentious archaisms and euphuisms, but nothing has remained on the surface to perpetuate these futile attempts and impotent efforts. It is the nature of the language to be clear, logical, and vigorous. It does not lend itself to weakness, obscurity, or corruption.</p>
			<p>Those who describe without duly heeding abstract terms, those who make rain and hail fall on the <em>cleanliness</em> of the window-panes, may throw stones at the simplicity of their brothers of the pen. The stones may indeed hit their brothers, who have a body, but will never hurt simplicity⁠—which has none.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Guy de Maupassant.</p>
				<p>La Guillette, Étretat, <time datetime="1887-09">September, 1887</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
